# TIS-100

## Architecture

In terms of graph theory, the nodes can have up to a maximum of four edges. Edges permit message passing between nodes (the manual calls them ports).

The following conditions will create deadlocks, resulting in a hardware fault:

- If two nodes in communication pass the same command (read or write).

- If a node is unable to fulfill a corresponding command from a communicating node.

## Registers

Registers store integer values between -999 and 999.

### ACC

Primary storage register for many instructions such as arithmetic and conditional instructions.

### BAK

Temporary storage for values in ACC. Only accessible through *SAV* and *SWP* instructions. Direct read/writes are not possible.

### NIL

Reading to *NIL* produces a value of 0. Writing to *NIL* has no effect. Can be used as a destination.

### LEFT, RIGHT, UP, DOWN

Communication registers that transfer register values to adjacent nodes.

### ANY

*ANY* as a source of instruction reads the first value that becomes available from any edge. *ANY* as a destination for an instruction will take a result sent to the first node that reads from any edge on this node.

### LAST

Refers to last used edge using the *ANY* pseudo-edge.

## Instruction Sets

*SRC* and *DST* parameters specify an edge or internal register. Use of an edge blocks until the message passing completes. A *SRC* parameter may also be a literal integer value.

*BAK* cannot be specified with *SRC* and *DST*, only *SAV* and *SWP*.

### Comments

`## TITLE` Use for title of the program. Useful for debugging.

`# Comment` Use for comments

### Labels

`<LABEL>:` Labels used to identify instructions for jumps.

### NOP

`NOP` A pseudo-instruction that means `ADD NIL`

### MOV

`MOV <SRC>, <DST>` Moves source value to destination values

### SWP

`SWP` Exchanges the values stored in ACC and BAK

### SAV

`SAV` Writes ACC value to BAK

### ADD

`ADD <SRC>` Adds the source value to ACC.

### SUB

`SUB <SRC>` Subtracts the source value to ACC

### NEG

`NEG` ACC value has its sign inverted

### JMP

`JMP <LABEL>` Jumps to label

### JEZ

`JEZ <LABEL>` Jumps to label if ACC value is equal to zero

### JNZ

`JNZ <LABEL>` Jumps to label if ACC value is not equal to zero

### JGZ

`JGZ <LABEL>` Jumps to label if ACC value is greater than zero

### JLZ

`JLZ <LABEL>` Jumps to label if ACC value is less than zero

### JRO

`JRO <SRC>` Jumps to instructions based on integer rather than label.

#### JRO Examples

`JRO 0` Stays at current JRO instruction (infinite loop)
`JRO -1` Jumps to prior instruction to JRO instruction
`JRO 2` Jumps to 2 instructions after JRO instruction (i.e. skips next instruction)
`JRO ACC` Jumps to instruction specified in ACC
