# SE-02

One quick note for the switches on the SE-02 that act as binary on/off switches is that when the switch is moved to the top position that is considered the on position.

## Basic Modes

The lower left switch is known as the "Mode select switch", and it controls the basic functionality of the SE-02 with `PATCH`, `SEQ`, and `SONG` modes.

## CONTROL

The Control section has a knob for GLIDE which changes the timing for portamento between notes. There is a switch that sets the glide to `OFF` `LINEAR` and `EXPONTENTIAL` (which is closest to how human ears perceive changes in portamento).

The `MOD WHEEL MIX` knob allows you to blend LFO and Crossmod filters. Note that this klnob is really designed for the modulation wheel for a MIDI controller, you won't notice any changes without one.

## OSCILLATORS

The SE-02 is a 3 oscillator monophonic synth. There are knobs for the octave range, pitch (this will always be relative to oscillator 1), and waveform for each oscillator.

There is also a `SYNC` switch for controlling whether the oscillators will go out of phase with each other or not (this is something that normally happens with oscillators for an analog synth). This sync feature is for oscillator 1 and 2.

The 2nd oscillator also features an envelope knob.

There is also a keyboard switch for oscillator 3 to track with the keyboard (this something the first two oscillators already do, but you can turn it off for oscillator 3 for some interesting variations for your patch).

The `XMOD` switch has three settings that affect the modulation wheel for your MIDI controller:

1. `A` oscillator 2 modulates the filter cutoff frequency
2. `B` oscillator 3 modulates the waveform of oscillator 2
3. `C` lets oscillator 3 modulate the pulse width of oscillators 1 and 2 if they have a square or pulse wave.

## XMOD

TODO

## MIXER

The mixer has volume control knobs for each oscillator, as well as a feedback knob that returns the output of the SE-02 (except for the delay) back into the mixer. Finally, there is a noise oscillator knob.

## FILTER/ENVELOPES

The cutoff knob controls the filter cutoff frequency. The emphasis knob boosts the region around the cutoff knob frequency.

There are switches for key tracks that affect how the filter cutoff frequency changes in response to the pitch from the keyboard. (TODO: Expand explanation)

The countour knob is used to adjust the depth of change produced by the envelope filters.

The Mtrig switch controls whether the filter envelope restarts on each key press or not.

The Norm/Invert switch controls the polarity of the envelope controlled by the contour knob.

The envelope is controlled by the attack, decay, and sustain knobs. There is a set for the filter envelope (first row), and a set for the amplifier envelope (2nd row).

The release of the envelope is controlled with a switch that has settings for applying to both, only the envelope, or off. The release will be set to the decay knob value.

There is also a switch that specifies whether the LFO or the note/gate controls the amp envelope.

## LFO

TODO

## DELAY

TODO

## PATCH MODE

The SE-02 features 384 patch presets, 128 patches each with 3 banks, banks A through C, plus 128 user patches with the USER bank.

### Selecting a Patch

Wait for the `COMP` and `PLAY` button to go dark, press one of the `A` - `C` or `USER` bank. Then enter a numeric value from range 1 to 128, or dial it in with the `VALUE` knob.

### Manual Mode

When you press the `MANUAL` button the SE-02 will be in manual mode, the sound will reflect the current settings of the Oscillators, Filters, LFOs, etc. When in manual mode the display will read `---`. You can return to the patch by pressing one of the bank buttons.

### Comparing Patches (COMP)

The `COMP` button will allow you to compare the current edit of a patch with a saved patch. If there are differences between the patches a dot will appear in the lower right hand part of the display.

### Playing with the Current Patch Setting

Press the `PLAY` button to activate the play setting in PATCH mode. Buttons `5` - `16` act as a one octave keyboard.

You can press the `OCT+` and `OCT-` while holding down the `TRANSPOSE` button to adjust the pitch an octave, up to a range of + or - 3 octaves. Alternatively you can adjust the `VALUE` knob while holding down the `TRANSPOSE` button.

Press the `OCT+` and `OCT-` buttons simulataneously while holding down the `TRANSPOSE` button to reset to the 0 (default) octave position.

### Patch Setup

You can adjust the patch parameters by pressing the `COMP` and `PLAY` buttons to make them light up. The `1` - `6` buttons will select parameters, and you can use the `VALUE` knob to adjust those values. The editable parameters are as follows:

1. Pitch bend range with a value range of 0 - 24.
2. Modulation wheel control depthj with a range of 0 - 127.
3. Aftertouch control depth of the LFO that affects the oscillators with a range of 0 - 127.
4. Aftertouch control depth of the cutoff frequency with a range of 0 - 127.
5. Depth of the `COUNTOUR` knob's effect with a range of 0-127.
6. Patch volume with a range of 0 - 127.

### Patch Write

1. Press the `VALUE` knob to access write mode.
2. Select the writing-destination user patch.
3. Press the `VALUE` knob to select the write-destination, and then press it a second time to confirm the location.

## SEQUENCING MODE

Set the mode select switch to `SEQ`. The SE-02 has storage for 128 sequences. These can be selected with the value knob at the lower-left, or by inputting the numbers with the number buttons. Patterns that have been edited will have a dot in the lower right corner of the display.

### Clearing a Sequence

Press the `NOTE` and `GATE` buttons together. Then select the red button to select the clear pattern option, and press down on the value knob to confirm.

### Creating a Sequence

While in `SEQ` mode, press the `NOTE` button. Now select the notes (1-16) you want to use. You can change the pitch of a note by selecting the note and pressing the button on a MIDI controller. You can also you the value knob to adjust the note.

### Editing a Sequence

Press the `GATE` button, select the note you want to use, and use the value knob to adjust a value of 1-100. 100 means there is no gap between the current note and the next note in the sequence, whereas 1 would create a very long gap.

Press the `GLIDE` button, select the notes you want to use, and adjust the glide knob to create some slides between notes.

Press the `PRM` (parameter) button to change the parameters (i.e. oscillators, XMPOD, mixer, filter/envelopes, lfo, and delay) for the notes.

The `PERFORM` button can be used to adjust the scale of the notes, add shuffle, and select the direction of the sequence (forward, reverse, alternating, and random).

## Connecting another device to the SE-02

Connect the trigger out of the other device to the trigger in for the SE-02. Hold down the `NOTE` and `GATE` buttons, and you can change the sync option from `INT` for internal, to USB, MIDI or trigger.
