# TB-03

The Roland TB-03 is a synthesizer that emulates the TB-303 that is synonymous with acid house.

## Selecting Patterns

1. Turn the `MODE` knob to `PLAY PATTERN`
2. Choose between Pattern Selection `A` or `B`
3. Select pattern `1-8`

## Manipulating Patterns

1. Hold down `PITCH MODE` and select a key to transpose to that key
2. Adjust the `VALUE` knob to change the tempo
3. Hold down the `TEMPO` button while adjusting the `VALUE` knob to adjust the shuffle of the pattern

## Writing Patterns in the TB-303 Original Mode

1. Select the "Original mode" by holding down the `FUNCTION` button and adjusting the `VALUE` knob to "NodE", it will then read "OrG" for original.
2. You can let go of the `FUNCTION` button and use the `VALUE` knob to adjust between the original and step modes.
3. Press function to exit and confirm 
4. Set the `MODE` knob to `WRITE PATTERN` 
5. Adjust the track group to the desired number, and choose 1-7
6. Select between Pattern Selection `A` or `B`
7. Press the `PATTERN CLEAR` button and the pattern number to clear.
8. Hold down the `BAR` button to change the number of steps and adjust the value with the `STEP` button. You can also do this by holding the `TIME MODE` button and adjusting the `VALUE` knob.
9. Press the `PITCH MODE` button to begin entering the notes to the sequences. 
10. Select the notes to be used for each step. You can use the `VALUE` knob to adjust the step. The `UP` and `DOWN` buttons change the octave.
11. Press the `TIME MODE` button to begin editing the time values of the sequenced notes. The buttons used for `TIME MODE` have the following values: 1. 16th notes, 2. tied notes, 3. and rests.
12. Additional manipulation of notes can be accomplished by going into `PITCH MODE` and holding the `TAP` button at which point the buttons near the `TIME MODE` button will refer to the text in the black background (transposing notes up and down an octave, adding an accent, or sliding from one note to the next). The `TAP` button is also used to advance to the next note in the pattern.
13. When you are done you can hit the `FUNCTION` button to return to normal mode.

## Writing Patterns Using the Step Method

1. Hold the `FUNCTION` button and adjust the `VALUE` knob to `NodE`.
2. Release the `FUNCTION` button and adjust the `VALUE` knob to `StEP` mode. Hit `FUNCTION` again to confirm.
3. Select the pattern you want with the `Pattern Group` knob, select from pattern bank `A` or `B`. 
4. Hold the `PATTERN CLEAR` button and select pattern 1-8 to clear the pattern and make it available.
5. Select `PITCH MODE`.
6. Select the notes you want to use for the pattern.
7. You can now play the sequence without having to go into time mode, and manipulate notes by holding down the note, and selecting the transpose, accent, and slide buttons.

## Copying a Pattern

1. Adjust the `MODE` knob to `PATTERN WRITE`
2. Select the source pattern
3. Hold down the `FUNCTION` button and press the `COPY` button (i.e. the F# button on the keyboard)
4. Select the pattern destination
5. Press the `WRITE/NEXT` button to execute the copy
