# TR-08

The Roland TR-08 is a drum machine that emulates the infamous 808.

## Modes

The `PATTERN WRITE` knob is used to adjust between the different modes available in the TR-08. 

1. `PATTERN CLEAR` is used to clear rhythm patterns.
2. Patterns consist of two parts `PATTERN WRITE 1ST PART` is used to write the first part.
3. `PATTERN WRITE 2ND PART` is used to write the 2nd part.
4. `MANUAL PLAY` is used to play patterns manually without written or prerecorded setups
5. `PLAY` plays assembled rhythm tracks. A rhythm track is the totality of patterns composed.
6. `COMPOSE` writes rhythm patterns to a rhythm track.

## Selecting a Pattern

The `Start/Stop` button changes how the number sequence buttons operate. When in the `STOP` position it is used to select a pattern. When it is in the `START` position it is used to insert instrument sounds within a bar sequence.

## Clearing a Pattern

Move the `PATTERN WRITE` knob to `PATTERN CLEAR`. Press the red `PATTERN CLEAR` button and select the pattern to clear. Note that the `A/B` switch position matters.

## Write a B Pattern

Writing to the B pattern is as simple as switching the A/B switch to the B position. When in the center it will alternate between A and B.

## Write a Second Part

There is in fact always a second part playing when you create a pattern, however by default the pattern is set to 0 steps, so in effect nothing happens. By adjusting the Pattern Write knob to the 2nd part, and holding the `PATTERN CLEAR` red button, you can then select 1 - 16 for the number of steps to include.

## Write a Sub Step

By holding down the `SUB STEP` button and selecting a `STEP NO` from 1 - 16 you can enter a note that happens half a step later.

## Adjusting Tempo

Adjust `TEMPO` dial for tempo. Adjust `FINE` dial for decimal tempo adjustments. Hold down the `TEMPO/SHUFFLE` button and adjust the `FINE` valve to adjust the shuffle value.

## Randomly Generate a Pattern

1. Hold the `MENU` button
2. Hold the `TAP` button and release

## Copying Patterns

1. Select `1st PART` or `2nd PART` on the`PATTERN WRITE` knob
2. Hold the `TAP` button
3. Select the **destination** pattern
4. Select the **source** pattern
5. Press `START` to execute the copy

### Copying Between A/B

1. Select `1st PART` or `2nd PART` on the`PATTERN WRITE` knob
2. Hold the `TAP` button
3. Use the value knob to select `A-b` for A to B, or `b-A` for B to A.
4. Press `START` to execute the copy

## Programming Sounds via Tap

In addition to being able to program sounds by selecting the sequence in the bar, you can also use the tap button and it will insert the selected instrument at that position within the bar. This is useful for live edits.

## Edit a Drum Sound

1. Press the `MENU` button
2. Use the `VALUE` knob to select an item
3. Press the `TAP` button to go into edit mode for the value of that item
4. Use the `VALUE` knob to edit the value of the item.
5. Press `MENU` to edit.

Some items include compression, gain, tune, decay, and pan.
